Ladies and gentlemen, our friends of Tennessee.
During the past few weeks I have received a great many letters from constituents and people
in Tennessee asking that I explain something about the drug inquiry, which the Senate Committee
of Monopoly and Antitrust, of which I am chairman, is presently conducting.
And I am welcome this opportunity of doing so.
This committee of which I am chairman has been in existence for a number of years.
We are charged with the responsibility of investigating monopoly lack of competition in order
to try to see that we do not have cartels and monopolization, also to try to see that
the small business man has a chance and that the consumer, in the case of drugs, the
patient gets a break too.
In the course of our investigation we have investigated steel, oil, automobiles, electrical
equipment and many many other things.
And there was a demand that there be some investigation of the manufacturer's price,
the big manufacturer's price of drugs.
I think we received a great deal more mail on this than we did all the other investigations
put together.
Indeed, a number of other senators in congressmen were interested in investigation as a matter
of fact, Senator Smathers filed a resolution asking it he be authorized to make an investigation,
but we have been collecting material for some time.
Now let me tell you just what we are trying to do.
In the first place, I want to make it very, very clear that this, as in other cases,
is only investigation of, at the manufacturer's level.
We are not undertaking to get into the retail investigation of retail pharmacists or drug
stores or wholesalers or anybody else.
As a matter of fact, the retail pharmacist is entitled to make a reasonable profit.
His profit is less than it is in the good many other lands of industry.
Now, virtue of the fact that he has to carry such a large inventory of trade names, this
does increase his cost.
We have the cooperation of a great many pharmacist I'm happy to say.
I'm sorry to say, however, that some seem to be letting the pharmacists take the blame
for what should be, what is the blame of the large pharmaceutical manufacturers.
When they get complaints about prices at the retail level, they should simply explain
that they have to pay high prices to the manufacturer for these products.
The second thing is that the physician is very much interested in the economic welfare
of his patient.
For the first time in history, the cost of drugs has exceeded the cost of medical care.
Very often a physician will charge, say, $5 for a visit.
The prescription may cost $9 or $9.5.
The physician knows, of course, that his patient can get better treatment.
He can get more of these good wonder drugs if the prices are lowered.
Now let's see, and the wholesaler also in the drug field, we're not investigating him
and we're not blaming him because he only, I guess, 15% differential, which is little
enough for him to try to do business on.
All of these are entitled to a fair profit, a fair return, and we're not fussing about
that.
We want the big manufacturers to get a fair profit too, but we don't want them to charge
excessive prices to people.
Here are the high profit industries in the United States.
In 1957 was a typical year.
In 1958, it's about the same only.
Drugs may be a little more.
You will see that after taxes, after payment for all of research and everything else, the
drug industry averaged almost 22% on net worth.
The average for all manufacturing was just about 11%, and you see some of the others.
Well let me show you something about prices.
In the case of a prednisone, which is a card-zone product used for the treatment of the 11
million arthritic people who must have these pills in the United States, the big companies
charge the pharmacist at the same price.
17 and 9 cents per pill.
The little companies who meet food and drug standards and qualifications charge a whole
at less.
They charge the government a whole at less.
We are all in favor of research, but research is only about 6.5% or 7% and can account for
these high prices.
We hope we will have more time to talk about this investigation later on.
Thank you very much.